Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman. Click this to return to our homepageAccessibilityLanguage
HomeDecisionsParliamentary decisionsReport
Care Quality Commission
Statement | Decision date: 30 March 2026
Summary
Mrs L complains that the Care Quality Commission’s (CQC) investigation into her mother-in-law’s death was inadequate. She is dissatisfied with the length of time it took to conclude the investigation and the lack of an appeal process or way to challenge the decision. She also raises concerns about the CQC’s failure to hold the care home accountable for its Duty of Candour obligations, its delay in visiting the care home until nine months after her mother-in-law’s death, and its absence of representation at the inquest into her mother-in-law’s passing.

Category	Outcome
Complaint handling	Closed after initial enquiries
Complaint handling	Closed after initial enquiries
Complaint handling	Closed after initial enquiries
Complaint handling	Closed after initial enquiries
Complaint handling	Closed after initial enquiries
Our decision . Click here to expand

1.	We have carefully considered Mrs L’s complaint and we have decided to take no further action. 

2.	Having reviewed the relevant evidence, we find that the CQC handled its investigation in line with the relevant guidance and the general timeframes set out within that guidance. While it did miss the timeframe to conclude the investigation after allocation, we consider that the mitigating factors we go set out in this report were justifiable.

3.	Equally, we find there is no failing in the fact that there is no right of appeal to CQC’s decision and that it properly investigated Mrs L’s concerns regarding Duty of Candour.

4.	Finally, we consider the CQC’s decision not to visit the site until nine months after the incident and not to attend the Inquest were appropriate.

5.	We understand this has been a difficult and frustrating experience for Mrs L and her family. We know her experience has and continues to be difficult as she feels she has not received the answers and appropriate action has not been taken following Mrs I’s death. Our decision is in no way meant to detract from how significant these matters are to her.

The complaint . Click here to expand

6.	Mrs L complains that the CQC’s investigation into her mother-in-law’s death was inadequate. Specifically, she complains that the CQC:
	•	took too long to conclude the investigation after it began in January 2022
	•	informed her there is no right of appeal or way to challenge the decision
	•	failed to hold the care home accountable over its duty of candour obligations
	•	did not visit the care home until nine months after her mother-in-law’s death
	•	did not send representation to her mother-in-law’s inquest

7.	She says that learning of the investigation’s shortcomings when the decision was shared was incredibly distressing and frustrating. She says that the investigation was compromised by the CQC’s delays and by not considering or even gathering all of the available evidence. She says the family missed out on the possibility of pursuing a private prosecution due to the time the investigation took to complete. She says that the end result is that she is still unsure of why the CQC did not choose to prosecute those involved.

8.	She would like an apology, an explanation for why it chose not to pursue prosecution, and service improvements made to introduce a mandatory appeals process for all investigation decisions.

Background . Click here to expand

9.	On 29 October 2021, Mrs L’s mother-in-law (Mrs I) died following a fall from her window at her Care Home.

10.	Following this, the CQC started an investigation on 1 November. An Inspection Manager contacted the Care Home to ensure that, following the decision, steps were being taken to ensure the safety of other residents.

11.	In January 2022, the Specific Incident Team took over and completed an investigation into Mrs I’s death. This concluded in April.

12.	Following this conclusion, the matter was referred internally to the Criminal Case Assessment and Progression Panel (CCAPP) whose job it is to determine whether or not a criminal investigation should be pursued. In May, CCAPP decided to investigate, and it informed Mrs L of this in June.

13.	The CCAPP gathered further evidence from the Care Home and liaised with the local Police, amongst others. In September 2023, a management review meeting recommended not to progress the investigation further but offered a further meeting with Mrs L and her family prior to confirming a final decision. This meeting took place in December.

14.	Following that meeting, CQC agreed in February 2024 to take no further action and explained this to Mrs L and her family during a meeting and in writing in May.

15.	Mrs L raised a complaint regarding the CQC’s investigation in June that it responded to in August. In its response, it upheld and partially upheld several aspects of her complaint only not upholding one.

16.	Mrs L’s MP referred her complaint to us in November.

Evidence . Click here to expand

17.	To reach our decision, we have looked at the information provided by Mrs L. This included her complaint form and correspondence with us in which she gave an account of events. We have also reviewed copies of Mrs L’s correspondence with CQC and copies of the CQC’s relevant records.

18.	We use relevant law, policy, guidance, and standards to inform our thinking. This allows us to consider what should have happened. In this case we have referred to the following standards:
	•	CQC’s Ask us to review a final decision not to prosecute (CQC’s Post-Decision Process), 
	•	CQC’s Specifics Incidents Guidance for Inspectors (Specific Incidents Guidance), 
	•	Health and Social Care Act 2008 (Regulated Activities) Regulations (the Regulations), 2014
	•	Guidance for Inspectors: Inquest Guidance (the Inquest Guidance), 
	•	Our Principles of Good Administration, (our Principles), 2009

Findings . Click here to expand

Time taken to conclude investigation

19.	Mrs L complains that the CQC took too long to complete its investigation. She says the investigation began in November 2021 and was not completed until May 2024 some 30 months later.

20.	The Specific Incidents Guidance includes general timeframes for how long an inspector should take to proceed between each aspect of the investigation process. However, it is key to highlight that these timeframes are general and cases vary depending on the length and complexity of the matter under investigation. It can also be affected by time taken by the need for all parties to engage in the process including availability and scheduling.

21.	The relevant timeframe excerpts of the Specific Incidents Guidance are:
	•	Time between CQC being notified of an incident and it being referred to either CCAPP or a Specific Incident Team: three months
	•	Mandatory meeting between the whole investigation team to report on investigative progress: four months after the point of allocation
	•	Time between the beginning of the Inspector’s investigation until conclusion: 18 months

22.	From what we have seen, the CQC acted within the general timeframes above for most of the above examples. We set out our reasons below.

23.	Regarding the time between the incident notification and the CQC referring it to a Specific Incident Team, the nursing home referred the incident on 30 October 2021 and it reached the Specific Incident Team in January 2022. This is within the three months set out in the Specific Incidents Guidance. From there, the Specific Incident Team decided to refer the matter onwards to CCAPP on 8 April which, again, is within three months. A meeting took place to discuss the investigation and its progress on 28 July 2022. This is within four months of its allocation to CCAPP.

24.	That said, regarding the completion of the investigation, this is where they do not appear to have met the 18-month window to conclude from allocation. From May 2022, when CCAPP initiated the investigation, according to the general timeframes within the Specific Incidents Guidance, the case should have been concluded by November of that year. A decision was not shared by the CQC until May 2024 meaning it missed that window by six months.

25.	While the window was missed, there does appear to be mitigating factors for this, particularly towards the end of the investigation process. From the records available, CQC reached a decision not to progress the investigation further in September 2023. This was following advice received over the course of the investigation. This is within the 18-month target set out in the Specific Incidents Guidance.

26.	However, prior to making that decision final it would arrange a meeting with Mrs L’s family as the CQC felt it needed to explore whether further evidence was available relating to the Duty of Candour concerns. This additional meeting was therefore for evidence-gathering purposes, and this could not have been done through other means or from other areas. This meeting did not take place until December which falls narrowly outside of the 18-month window. The family shared some more information and CQC discussed this at another meeting in February 2024 before confirming its decision in a further meeting with the family in May.

27.	This shows the CQC’s formal decision was confirmed outside of the 18-month window. While this is outside a general target timeframe of 18 months after allocation to CCAPP we think this does not fall so far short that it is an indication of a failing. We find this is a shortcoming in the service provided, based on factors around it. 

28.	We can see from the evidence available that actions were on-going in the case throughout the investigation, and it appears to have been logistics that contributed to the extended delay. The outcome of the September 2023 meeting meant three further meetings were needed. These were one with the family to explore Duty of Candour evidence further, one internally to discuss what was provided and make a decision, and a further meeting with the family to share that decision.

29.	As we set out earlier, the timeframes within the Specific Incidents Guidance are general targets to work towards and not definitive deadlines. The CQC could have issued a decision in September 2023 but wanted to ensure it had everything it needed to conclude on the Duty of Candour concerns and needed the family to provide that information. This decision is what took it beyond the timeframe and, while a shortcoming, we do not consider it a failing that steps were taken to ensure it was able to reach a fully informed decision.

30.	We recognise this this was a lengthy and difficult process for Mrs L and her family. The loss of Mrs I would have been undoubtedly difficult for everyone and the time it took for the investigation to resolve would only have compounded this difficulty. We are pleased to see the CQC has apologised for the time taken and the impact this had on the family. 

31.	Overall, we consider that though the time taken to conclude the investigation was lengthy, we do not consider it a failing, but rather a shortcoming. The CQC has generally acted within the timeframes set out within the relevant guidance and, where it has not, we can see the mitigating factors for why. Therefore, we will not consider this further.

No right of appeal

32.	Mrs L complains that the CQC informed her upon the completion of the investigation that there was no right of appeal if she disagreed.

33.	CQC’s Post-Decision Process outlines what can happen after it has made a decision not to prosecute. It outlines that there are two scenarios where a person can ask for a review of that decision. These are where the final decision has been made or where CQC began prosecution action but discontinued or withdrew at Court. The CQC refers to this one as the Victim’s Right to Review. The CQC clarifies that a ‘final decision not to prosecute’ is one where it has applied a full code test to the Crown Prosecutors. Where that does not happen, there is no right to review. CQC will not accept a review of a decision where it has either not started or discontinued an investigation or the incident took place more than three years prior.

34.	The CQC has also confirmed to us that someone who is unhappy with its decision not to proceed with a prosecution could challenge this through Judicial Review (JR). In this instance, there would be no need for the CQC to have completed a full code test. The decision itself would be challengeable via a JR regardless.

35.	Our Principles set out how we expect organisations to act. In order to be customer focussed, we expect organisations to make clear what customers can and cannot expect from a public body and about their entitlements.

36.	The CQC’s Post-Decision process is clear in that a Victim can only request a review of a decision in specific circumstances. While this is not an appeal, as Mrs L has presented it, the spirit remains the same as that meant there was no process within CQC to challenge the outcome. It explains this to Mrs L in its decision letter dated April 2024.

37.	Ultimately, reviews are only available when the full code test has been applied as this test determines whether sufficient evidence exists to proceed with a prosecution or not. Cases that do not reach this stage fall outside the scope of the review process. By setting this boundary, the CQC makes clear what a service user is entitled to.

38.	We understand Mrs L’s frustrations with what is a difficult situation and we empathise with her concerns. The CQC’s process is clear and reviews can only be requested if the full code test for prosecution has been applied meaning that her case does not fall within the criteria for review. While judicial review is not the same as an appeal, it could have been an alternative avenue available to challenge the decision. Given this, we consider the CQC has acted in line with its processes and our Principles, so there are no indications of maladministration.

Failure to hold the care home accountable

39.	Mrs L complains that the CQC’s eventual decision does not hold the care home accountable over its duty of candour obligations. While the Care Home did provide an apology following a complaints investigation, they did not receive a Duty of Candour letter prior to that.

40.	Duty of Candour obligations are set out in the Regulations under Regulation 20. This outlines that the Health Service Body must, among other points, provide an apology for the incident ‘as soon as reasonably practicable’.

41.	Our Principles state that in order to get things right we expect organisations to have regard to the relevant legislation and that its decision-making should take account of all relevant considerations.

42.	We believe the CQC’s consideration of Mrs L’s Duty of Candour concerns were done in line with our Principles. In this case, the CQC’s response sets out the different ways in which the Health Service Body had taken steps to engage with the family. This included communication through phone calls and face-to-face meetings alongside the written apology provided after Mrs L’s complaint.

43.	The CQC reviewed whether these actions met the requirements of Regulation 20 through discussions with its legal team and a referral to the CCAPP. The conclusion was that, while the apology letter was issued after Mrs L’s initial concerns, the actions taken by the provider collectively fulfilled the key elements of the Duty of Candour.

44.	We appreciate Mrs L disagrees with the CQC’s decision and maintains that the steps taken by the Health Service Body do not meet its Duty of Candour. The delay in providing this and the manner in which it was provided would certainly have added to the already difficult experience of Mrs I’s death. We empathise with the incredibly trying situation she has found herself in and can understand how the Health Service Body’s actions may have contributed to this.

45.	Given the detailed consideration of these requirements and the evidence reviewed, we believe the CQC acted in line with our Principles and reached a reasonable conclusion that the Duty of Candour was met in this case. Therefore, we will not consider it further. 

Did not complete a site visit

46.	Mrs L complains that the CQC did not visit the site as part of its investigation until nine months after the incident.

47.	The Specific Incidents Guidance sets out the actions open to an inspector to investigate a case. Under section 4, it outlines that if there are concerns about continuing risk to people who use services then a meeting may be held to determine appropriate actions as part of ‘Stage 1 Initial Assessment’. These actions may include deciding to carry out an on-site inspection ‘where justified’.

48.	Our Principles state that public bodies should behave reasonably and ensure that the measures taken are proportionate to the objectives pursued, appropriate in the circumstances and fair to the individuals concerned.

49.	We believe the CQC acted in line with both the Specific Incidents Guidance and Our Principles in its decision not to conduct a site visit as part of its investigation. While a visit did take place in July 2022, we note this was only to gather information ‘if required’.

50.	With regard to the Specific Incidents Guidance, we can see that the CQC requested and received assurances from the provider shortly after the incident. These assurances included evidence that window restrictors had been replaced and risk assessments for residents were updated. These actions would have greatly mitigated the immediate or continuing risk to the safety of those using the service and meant that a site visit was not necessary.

51.	In terms of our Principles, the CQC gathered evidence and assessed the situation through proportionate measures, including relying on information provided by the provider, the Local Authority, and the Police, and other documentation. Although a site visit was an option under the guidance, the CQC determined that the steps that had already been taken were enough to address ongoing risk. Therefore, its decision to avoid a site visit was appropriate and in line with our Principles.

52.	With the above in mind, we do not believe that there are any indications of a failing in the CQC’s decision not to complete a site visit as part of its investigation.

53.	We understand that Mrs L is unhappy a site visit did not take place sooner and believes this should have been done to aid the investigation. To find that it was not done until nine months later would have been frustrating given the seriousness of the events being investigated and we acknowledge her stance on this.

Did not send representation to the inquest

54.	Mrs L complains that the CQC failed to send a representative to the inquest into her mother-in-law’s death.

55.	The Inquest Guidance sets out how the CQC engages with Coroners and inquests. There is no obligation to attend an inquest and equally no specific requirement to listen to the recordings as part of the evidence gathering process. There are times when attendance may become mandatory but that invitation is at the discretion of the Coroner and not the CQC.

56.	Our Principles state that, in decision-making, an organisation should take account of all relevant considerations, ignore irrelevant ones and balance the evidence appropriately. 

57.	We cannot say it is a failing that the CQC did not send a representative to the Inquest given there is no obligation, legal or otherwise, for them to do so. That said, an Inquest is a source of intelligence for an investigation and we have considered how the CQC has processed that.

58.	We know that the CQC did not attend and did not listen to the recording of the inquest. That said, the Coroner provided a bundle of evidence following this including their report. Having reviewed this, the CQC felt that the issues that arose during the Inquest would not have advanced the criminal investigation they were pursuing. Their investigation related to the window restrictors and what came up during the Inquest was, for example, staff fluency in English.

59.	With the above in mind, we consider the CQC acted in line with the Inquest Guidance and our Principles. There was nothing requiring them to send an attendee to the Inquest but, following it, the relevant information was considered and balanced when it reached a decision. Therefore, we will not consider it further.

60.	As with the site visit, we understand Mrs L believes not attending the Inquest was to the detriment of the investigation and that the CQC should have sent a representative. To attend the Inquest would have been an already challenging moment and we can entirely appreciate how it would look that the CQC did not also do so despite the investigation. We hope our investigation helps explain its reasons for not doing so, and we wish he and her family well for the future. 

Stay updated
Subscribe to our mailing list for regular updates about our work.
Enter email address
Contact us
 Helpline 0345 015 4033
Monday to Thursday 9am to 4pm | Friday 8.30am to 12pmAbout us
Make a complaint
Latest jobs
News
Freedom of information requests
Accessibility|Contact us|Cookies|Privacy|Sitemap
Our Decisions

Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman. Click this to return to our homepageAccessibilityLanguage
HomeDecisionsParliamentary decisionsReport
HM Courts and Tribunals Service
Statement | Decision date: 30 March 2026
Summary
Mr A complains that HM Courts and Tribunals Service (HMCTS) failed to submit two claims. He also complains that HMCTS gave inconsistent information about fee remission and did not handle his complaint properly.

Category	Outcome
Courts	Closed after initial enquiries
Our decision . Click here to expand

1.	We have carefully considered Mr A’s complaint about HM Courts and Tribunals Service (HMCTS). We strongly sympathise with Mr A’s position. Court proceedings are stressful and complex, and we do not underestimate the impact of this, particularly where children are involved. 

2.	However, having carefully reviewed the evidence available to us, we have not seen any indication that HMCTS has got anything wrong in the administrative handling of Mr A’s claims.


The complaint . Click here to expand

3.	Mr A complains about the administrative handling of two Part 7 claims he submitted to HMCTS. In particular, he says that:

	•	HMCTS failed to issue his claim forms in accordance with CPR 7.2. He told us he properly filed two claim forms and provided the required fees or fee remission, but HMCTS did not issue either claim. Mr A says one of the claims was later dismissed as “totally without merit”, but he believes this dismissal was invalid because the claim had not been properly issued. Mr A says the second claim has still not been issued or placed before a judge.

	•	HMCTS gave him incorrect or inconsistent information about fee remission. He told us HMCTS staff wrongly told him that his fee remission certificate was insufficient, and that this delayed or prevented his claims from being issued.

	•	HMCTS mishandled his complaint about these matters. He says HMCTS did not follow its own complaint response times and that its responses were inaccurate or did not address the issues he raised.


Background . Click here to expand

4.	Court proceedings are often complex and generate a large volume of background material and evidence. In the interests of proportionality, we have not set out the full detail of those proceedings here. 

5.	This is because many of the matters raised relate to judicial functions which fall outside the Ombudsman’s jurisdiction, and because the parties are already familiar with the history of the case. We have therefore summarised only the background necessary to explain the issues within the scope of this investigation.

6.	Mr A’s complaint arises from Family Court proceedings in Coventry concerning contact with his daughter.

7.	On 14 June 2020 Mr A applied to the Family Court for a change of primary carer. He also applied for a MIAM exemption, which was accepted by order dated 16 June 2020. The case was referred to Cafcass for safeguarding enquiries.

8.	Mr A says the court did not follow Practice Direction 12B during these proceedings, did not list a First Hearing Dispute Resolution Appointment, and delayed sending written orders from several hearings in 2021 and 2022. He believes these delays prevented him from appealing those decisions.

9.	Mr A attempted to issue two Part 7 claims in the High Court against the Lord Chancellor. These claims related to the conduct of the earlier Family Court proceedings.

10.	Mr A complained to HMCTS about the handling of these matters. HMCTS issued a first complaint response on 17 June 2024, a review response on 17 July 2024, and a final response on 30 July 2024.


Evidence . Click here to expand

11.	To reach this decision, we have considered Mr A’s complaint to us, his correspondence with HMCTS and HMCTS’s responses to his complaint. We have also looked at the court documents and e-filing information he provided as evidence in this case. 

12.	We use relevant law, policy, guidance and standards to inform our thinking. This allows us to consider what should have happened. In this case we have referred to the following standards:

	•	Civil Procedure Rules 7.2 (2024)
	•	Civil Procedure Rules 3.7A1 (2024)

Findings . Click here to expand

Processing and issuing of Part 7 forms

13.	Before we decide if we should conduct a detailed investigation of a complaint, we look at whether there are signs the organisation has got something wrong. We do this by comparing what should have happened with what did happen. We have done this and have not found any indications that something has gone wrong.

14.	Mr A says HMCTS failed to issue his claim forms in accordance with CPR 7.2. He says he properly filed two claims and provided the required fees or fee remission, but HMCTS did not issue either claim. Mr A told us that one of the claims was later dismissed as “totally without merit” and says that this is because HMCTS had not properly issued it.

15.	We have considered the evidence relating to Mr A’s attempts to issue two Part 7 claims in the High Court in March 2024. We have seen that Mr A submitted claim forms through the HMCTS E-Filing service on 20 March 2024 and again on 22 March 2024. The E-Filing records provided by Mr A in this complaint show that both submissions were rejected by HMCTS. 

16.	In the first instance, the rejection notice explains that the claim form did not state the correct court fee, that the defendant details required amendment for the purposes of the E-Filing portal, and that the Help With Fees reference provided was not sufficient evidence that a fee remission had been granted. Mr A was advised that he would need to obtain confirmation from the Fees Office and resubmit the claim with the required changes.

17.	A subsequent filing was also rejected. The rejection notice stated that the Help With Fees reference number alone was not proof that a fee remission had been granted and explained that a Fee Remission Certificate would need to be submitted with the claim form.

18.	Looking at the evidence provided, we can see that Mr A later obtained confirmation from the HMCTS Fees Office that his Help With Fees applications had been successful. The documents show that fee remission was granted in the amounts of £9,180.50 and £569.00 respectively. The confirmation letters also explain that when filing documents through the E-Filing system, the Fee Remission Certificate must be attached as proof of the remission.

19.	Taken together, the documents show that the claims were initially rejected because HMCTS did not have sufficient evidence of the applicable court fee or a confirmed fee remission at the point the claims were submitted through the E-Filing system.

20.	We have also considered whether the correct court fee was provided for the claim. The documents show that Mr A’s Help With Fees application covered remission of £9,180.50, with a further remission certificate issued for £569.00. 

21.	However, the rejection notices from HMCTS indicate that the fee information provided with the original filing did not match the amount required for the claim. This appears to be one of the reasons the submission was rejected through the E-Filing system.

22.	We have also considered the correspondence between Mr A and HMCTS following these rejections. The evidence shows that HMCTS received Mr A’s claim by email on 23 March 2024 and returned it on 24 April 2024 on the basis that the fee was less than required to process the claim.

23.	The documents show that Mr A subsequently provided his Help With Fees remission certificates to HMCTS on 17 April 2024. These certificates confirmed that fee remission had been granted in the amounts set out above.

24.	HMCTS later confirmed to Mr A that, following receipt of the remission certificates, the claim was processed on 15 May 2024 and allocated claim number KB-2024-001441. In correspondence with HMCTS, Mr A later referred to a second claim and asked why it had not been issued. However, the documents provided show that a second claim was subsequently issued and allocated claim number KB-2024-001467.

25.	The evidence shows that HMCTS initially rejected the filings because the information provided through the E-Filing system did not include sufficient evidence of the applicable court fee or confirmed fee remission. Once the remission certificates were provided, HMCTS processed the claim and issued a claim number.

26.	Mr A refers to CPR 7.2 and says HMCTS failed to issue his claim forms in accordance with that rule. The Civil Procedure Rules (CPR) are the procedural rules governing civil proceedings in the courts of England and Wales. They set out the framework for how civil cases should be conducted, including how proceedings are started, how claims are managed by the court, and the responsibilities of the parties involved.

27.	CPR 7.2 explains when proceedings are considered to have started. It provides that proceedings are started when the court issues a claim form at the request of the claimant. However, the rule does not prescribe how HMCTS must administratively process claim forms or filings before issue. Matters such as verifying the court fee or confirming a valid Help With Fees remission form part of HMCTS’s administrative processes.

28.	In any event, the evidence shows that both of Mr A’s claims were in fact issued by HMCTS, allocated claim numbers KB-2024-001441 and KB-2024-001467 and put before a judge in the King’s Bench Division of the High Court.

29.	In each case, the judge considered the claim form and accompanying documents and made an order striking the claim out as “totally without merit”.

30.	Decisions made by a judge in the exercise of judicial functions are outside the Ombudsman’s authority. We cannot investigate or question those decisions. Our role is limited to considering the administrative actions of HMCTS, including whether the claims were processed and issued. 

31.	Mr A says that because HMCTS initially refused to process the claims due to issues with the fee remission evidence, the claims were not validly issued under CPR 7.2. He therefore believes the court had no authority to consider them and that the subsequent strike-out orders are invalid. 

32.	This argument relates to the court proceedings themselves and falls under the jurisdiction of the court. This is not something we can take a view on. The Ombudsman cannot review or substitute the court’s decision. 

33.	We recognise that Mr A feels strongly that he has been prevented from pursuing his claims and that this has been distressing for him. Our role is limited to considering the administrative actions of HMCTS. 

34.	The evidence shows that both claims were issued and allocated claim numbers KB-2024-001441 and KB-2024-001467 before being considered by a judge in the High Court. In light of this, we are satisfied that HMCTS did issue the claims. HMCTS has no control over hearings beyond this stage, and we have seen no indications it has not acted in line with its administrative responsibilities in this complaint. 


Inconsistent/incorrect information about fee remission

35.	Mr A says that HMCTS gave him incorrect or inconsistent information about fee remission and wrongly told him that his Help With Fees reference was insufficient. We have reviewed the evidence relating to Mr A’s Help With Fees applications. 

36.	The documents show that Mr A was later granted fee remission for the relevant amounts. However, the E-Filing rejection notices explain that the Help With Fees reference number alone was not sufficient evidence that remission had been granted. HMCTS advised Mr A that a Fee Remission Certificate would need to be provided with the claim form.

37.	HMCTS did not dispute that Mr A was eligible for fee remission. The issue appears to be that the remission had not been evidenced in the way required by the E-Filing system at the time the claims were submitted. 

38.	We have also considered the information provided in the E-Filing rejection notices and the Help With Fees confirmation letters. These explain that when filing a claim through the HMCTS E-Filing system, evidence of fee remission must be provided at the point of submission. The rejection notices state that a Help With Fees reference number alone is not sufficient evidence that remission has been granted and that the Fee Remission Certificate must be attached.

39.	We accept that Mr A was later granted fee remission for the relevant amounts. However, for the purposes of filing a claim through the E-Filing system, HMCTS explained the remission must be evidenced in the manner required at the point of submission.

40.	Where the required court fee has not been paid, or valid evidence of fee remission has not been provided, the Civil Procedure Rules allow the court to refuse to process the document until the fee issue is resolved.

41.	Having reviewed the correspondence and the E-Filing rejection notices, we have not seen evidence that HMCTS gave conflicting information. The notices consistently explain that a Help With Fees reference number alone was not sufficient evidence that remission had been granted and that the Fee Remission Certificate would need to be attached to the filing.

42.	We also note that it is the responsibility of the party bringing a claim to ensure that the correct court fee is paid, or that valid evidence of fee remission is provided at the time the claim is filed. HMCTS’s role is administrative. Its staff process filings and check that the required fee or evidence of remission has been provided before issuing a claim. Based on the evidence we have seen, HMCTS explained what was required and processed the claim once the remission certificates were provided.


Complaint handling and delays

43.	Mr A also complains that HMCTS did not follow its complaint handling timescales.

44.	Looking at the evidence, Mr A submitted a complaint to HMCTS on 16 May 2024. HMCTS issued its first response on 17 June 2024. Mr A requested a review the same day, and HMCTS issued its review response on 17 July 2024 and a further, final response on 30 July 2024. 

45.	HMCTS’s complaint policy sets target times for responding to complaints. However, these timeframes are service standards rather than strict requirements. While organisations should aim to meet these targets, failing to do so does not automatically suggest a failing. 

46.	We have also considered the impact of such a delay on Mr A. The complaint responses reiterated the explanations already provided to Mr A about why his filings had initially been rejected and how the claims were later processed once the fee remission evidence had been provided. The responses did not introduce new information that would have altered Mr A’s claims.

47.	In this case, HMCTS did take longer than its stated targets to respond to Mr A’s complaint and review request. We recognise that delays in complaint responses can be frustrating. However, HMCTS did ultimately provide responses addressing the issues Mr A had raised.

48.	Mr A also says that HMCTS’s complaint responses did not address the concerns he raised. We have reviewed those responses. They address the administrative aspects of Mr A’s complaint, including the handling of his filings and the issue relating to fee remission.

49.	However, many of the concerns raised by Mr A relate to matters such as the decisions made by judges, the conduct of court proceedings, and arguments about human rights law. These matters relate to judicial functions. HMCTS’s role is limited to the administrative management of court processes, and it does not have authority to review or comment on judicial decisions.

50.	In those circumstances, it was reasonable for HMCTS to limit its responses to the administrative matters within its remit.

51.	We recognise that Mr A feels strongly about the circumstances of his case and the impact the proceedings have had on him. However, our role is limited to considering the administrative actions of HMCTS.

52.	Having carefully reviewed the available evidence, we have not seen any indication that HMCTS got anything wrong in the administrative handling of Mr A’s claims. The evidence shows the claims were issued once the required fee remission evidence had been provided and were then considered by the court. We have also not seen evidence that HMCTS provided conflicting information about fee remission.

53.	We acknowledge that HMCTS did not meet its target timescales when responding to Mr A’s complaint. While delays can understandably be frustrating, the complaint responses were provided and HMCTS engaged with Mr A consistently throughout the process. 


54.	In light of this, we have not found indications of maladministration in the matters we are able to consider and it is not appropriate for us to consider this complaint further.
  



Stay updated
Subscribe to our mailing list for regular updates about our work.
Enter email address
Contact us
 Helpline 0345 015 4033
Monday to Thursday 9am to 4pm | Friday 8.30am to 12pmAbout us
Make a complaint
Latest jobs
News
Freedom of information requests
Accessibility|Contact us|Cookies|Privacy|Sitemap
Our Decisions

Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman. Click this to return to our homepageAccessibilityLanguage
HomeDecisionsParliamentary decisionsReport
Veterans UK
Statement | Decision date: 29 March 2026
Summary
Mr E complains about Veterans UK’s (VUK) handling of his asthma claim. He says the Armed Forces Compensation Scheme delayed transferring his claim to the War Pension Scheme (WPS) and that the WPS took nearly two months to register his case. He is also unhappy that VUK initially claimed there were no errors in handling his case, despite later admitting mistakes.

Category	Outcome
Pensions	Closed after initial enquiries
Our decision . Click here to expand

1.	We have carefully considered Mr E’s complaint about Veterans UK (VUK). We understand Mr E experienced frustration and uncertainty because of what happened, and the way in which he says the VUK dealt with his claim. We are sorry to hear about his experience.

2.	We have seen no indication that anything went seriously wrong. Where VUK made mistakes, we can see it has already done enough to put right the impact of these events on Mr E.

3.	We will explain our decision in detail below. We hope this will help Mr E to understand our decision and give some reassurance about what happened.

The complaint . Click here to expand

4.	 Mr E complains about how VUK handled his asthma claim. He says the Armed Forces Compensation Scheme (AFCS) did not transfer his claim to the War Pension Scheme (WPS) in a timely manner. 

5.	He also says WPS did not register his escalation from AFCS for nearly two months after his complaint outcome and claimed there had been no mistakes in its handling of his case, even though it acknowledged this in its responses. 

6.	Because of this, Mr E says he felt uncertain, ignored and dismissed. He says he experienced stress and frustration which impacted his mental health and affected his daily life and ability to focus on work and family. 

7.	In bringing the complaint to us, Mr E is seeking an apology and an explanation of what went wrong.



Background . Click here to expand

8.	A WPS is a compensation scheme for veterans who suffered an illness, injury, or death because of their military service before April 6, 2005.

9.	 The AFCS is a compensation scheme for UK serving and former service personnel injured as a result of their military service. The AFCS compensates for any injury, illness or death which was caused by service on or after 6 April 2005.

10.	VUK, a division of the Ministry of Defence (MOD), oversees the WPS and the AFCS. VUK assesses claims by establishing a link between the service personnel’s condition and their military service.

11.	Mr E submitted a claim for asthma in September 2024, under the AFCS, believing exposure to chemicals between 2004 and 2012 caused his condition. In early March 2025, VUK issued Mr E its decision. VUK rejected his claim.

12.	At the end of March, Mr E made a complaint to VUK about how it had handled his claim and requested a reconsideration. VUK acknowledged his complaint the same day. 

13.	At the beginning of April, VUK provided a Stage one decision letter. It explained that a caseworker and a medical advisor (MA) had reviewed all the evidence before deciding that his service had not predominantly caused his condition. It therefore did not uphold his complaint.

14.	The response also noted that Mr E had included records dating back to November 2004. Since the AFCS cannot consider claims for events prior to April 2005, VUK acknowledged once the AFCS completed its process in March 2025, it should have transferred Mr E’s claim to WPS to assess anything before April 2005. It apologised for the oversight and assured Mr E it would process his claim as quickly as possible.

15.	The letter also provided information about how Mr E could escalate his complaint to Stage two if he wished and included details of the Veterans Welfare Service (VWS), which offers free and confidential guidance, information and support to veterans.

16.	In mid-April, Mr E submitted a further complaint to VUK via his MP, as he was unhappy that AFCS had not transferred his claim to WPS. He requested immediate registration of his case with WPS, an explanation for the delay, and confirmation it would now progress his case. 

17.	VUK responded in mid-May and apologised for not transferring his case to WPS after the AFCS had completed its claim process. It explained Mr E’s file was under review and that a caseworker would provide regular updates on his claim every 12 weeks.

18.	In mid-June, VUK issued a Stage two response letter, which did not uphold Mr E’s complaint. It explained that although it had registered Mr E’s WPS claim, it had delayed progress because of an increase in claims and implementing a new technology platform intended to improve future service delivery.

19.	VUK clarified that as Mr E’s claim involved both the AFCS and the WPS, it could not progress the WPS claim until the AFCS completed his claim. It apologised for the delays, any misinformation that it may have given during the process, and the complications caused by the overlap between the two schemes. It also confirmed that Mr E’s claim was under review and that a caseworker would contact him as soon as further information was available. 

20.	VUK outlined the service improvements it had put in place and planned to implement to prevent similar issues in the future. It also signposted Mr E to the PHSO and the VWS.

21.	As Mr E remained unhappy, he contacted his MP in mid-June. Shortly afterwards, we received his formal complaint.

Evidence . Click here to expand
 
22.	We have considered the following information when coming to a decision on this complaint:

	•	Mr E’s complaint form 
	•	Vets UK’s responses to Mr E
	•	information provided by Mr E over the phone and via email.

23.	We use relevant law, policy, guidance and standards to inform our thinking. This allows us to consider what should have happened. In this case we have referred to the following standards:
	•	Our ‘Principles of Remedy’, February 2009 
	•	Our ‘Complaint Standards’, December 2022

Findings . Click here to expand

24.	 Before we decide if we should investigate a complaint, we look at whether there are signs the event complained about had a negative effect which the organisation has not put right. We have done this, and we have found that VUK has already done enough to put right the impact of these events.

25.	Mr E complains about the delay in his claim being transferred from the AFCS to the WPS, and about the handling of his case by VUK. 

26.	Specifically, he says the AFCS did not transfer his claim to the WPS in a timely manner following the completion of its decision in early March 2025. He also says the WPS did not register his claim for nearly two months and that, during this time, VUK provided no updates, told him there was no record of his claim, and claimed there were no mistakes even though it acknowledged these in its responses.

27.	Mr E asked VUK to immediately register his claim with the WPS, explain the delay, and confirm that it would progress his case. He also says he made multiple phone calls, was repeatedly told there was no record of his claim and received no updates or confirmation of his claim during this time. 

28.	Mr E says these delays caused him stress, frustration, and uncertainty, which negatively affected his mental health. He is seeking an explanation of what went wrong and an apology.

29.	Our Principles of Remedy and Complaint Standards outline that organisations should acknowledge mistakes and take responsibility for these. They should also apologise, explain what went wrong, and take steps to promptly put things right.

30.	From the information we have reviewed, it is clear that AFCS should have transferred Mr E’s claim to the WPS immediately after it completed its process in March 2025. In its April response, VUK acknowledged that this was an error and explained that the claim included medical records from November 2004, which fell outside the scope of the AFCS. 

31.	Due to an administrative oversight, the claim was not transferred until April 2025, which caused a delay of approximately four weeks. We understand that this delay caused Mr E stress, frustration, and feelings of uncertainty, which negatively impacted his mental health.

32.	We can see that in its April 2025 response, VUK acknowledged the error, apologised to Mr E, and assured him the claim would now be processed as quickly as possible. Furthermore, in its subsequent correspondence in May and June, VUK continued to update Mr E, explained what had happened, apologised, and outlined the steps it was taking to address the issue, including assigning a caseworker to his claim and providing regular updates every 12 weeks.

33.	In its final response in June, VUK explained that delays in progressing the claim were caused by an increase in demand and the implementation of a new technology system to improve future service delivery. It assured Mr E that his case was being reviewed and would be progressed. 

34.	VUK also acknowledged the challenges caused by the delay, apologised for the inconvenience and misinformation provided to Mr E, and explained the additional complications caused from the overlap of his claim between the two schemes. It clarified that, as Mr E’s claim involved both the AFCS and the WPS, the WPS claim could not have progressed until the AFCS process was completed.

35.	While we recognise Mr E’s frustration with the lack of updates prior to April and the uncertainty this caused, we can see that once VUK identified the issue, it acted appropriately. It took responsibility for its actions, clearly explained what had gone wrong, apologised to Mr E, and resolved the matter. These are the actions Mr E said he wanted to achieve and are consistent with our Complaint Standards and Principles of Good Administration. 

36.	We recognise that this experience has caused Mr E understandable frustration and stress, which he says affected his mental wellbeing. We acknowledge the challenges he faced and thank him for making the effort to bring this complaint to us. Based on the information available, we are satisfied that VUK’s actions were reasonable and that it has done enough to put right the impact of these events.

37.	For these reasons, we will take no further action on Mr E’s complaint.

38.	Finally, we would like to reassure Mr E that his complaint has been logged in our system and will contribute to our ongoing monitoring of potential systemic issues involving VUK or similar cases. By systemic issues, we mean patterns or repeated complaints of a similar nature that may indicate wider concerns regarding the organisation or its processes.

39.	While we understand that Mr E may be disappointed with the outcome of our assessment, we hope this explanation provides reassurance that his complaint has been thoroughly reviewed and considered in line with our standards. We wish Mr E well for the future.


Stay updated
Subscribe to our mailing list for regular updates about our work.
Enter email address
Contact us
 Helpline 0345 015 4033
Monday to Thursday 9am to 4pm | Friday 8.30am to 12pmAbout us
Make a complaint
Latest jobs
News
Freedom of information requests
Accessibility|Contact us|Cookies|Privacy|Sitemap
Our Decisions

Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman. Click this to return to our homepageAccessibilityLanguage
HomeDecisionsParliamentary decisionsReport
Student Loans Company (SLC)
Report | Decision date: 18 March 2026
Summary
Ms Y was incorrectly awarded funding by SLC and had her funding withdrawn. She complains about the mistakes it made when checking her eligibility and the way that SLC dealt with her complaint.

Category	Outcome
Student loans	Upheld
Our decision . Click here to expand
1.	Ms Y complains about an incorrect decision about her funding made by the Student Loan Company (SLC). We have found the impact of SLC’s mistake has not yet been properly remedied. Although we have found that SLC offered Ms Y some remedy to her complaint we do not think that it is sufficient or taken into full consideration the impact it had on her. Therefore, we have upheld the complaint. 

2.	To put right the impact to Ms Y, we recommend that SLC reimburse Ms Y for the losses we have calculated below and make a payment of £1000 to remedy the emotional impact and stress the failing had on her.
The complaint . Click here to expand

3.	Ms Y complains about Student Loans Company. She says that it incorrectly awarded her funding. When this funding was withdrawn, SLC did not take all the circumstances that led to it being withdrawn into consideration when asking her to repay the loans. Add text of agreed scope.

4.	Ms Y also complains about the delays with Student Loans Company dealing with her complaint. 

5.	As a result, she says the process had an impact on her mental health, and she suffered from stress and financial hardship. 

6.	As an outcome she is seeking service improvements and financial remedy. 


Background . Click here to expand

7.	Ms Y contacted SLC in May 2022 and she was advised that she could apply for student finance as an EEA Migrant Worker (MW) in her own right. 
 
8.	Ms Y then submitted her application for the academic year 2022/23 with the relevant evidence. SLC accepted Ms Y’s application on 29 July 2022 as a MW in her own right and awarded financial support. This was confirmed in writing to Ms Y in August 2022, with a notice of entitlement which said she was eligible for a maintenance loan and tuition fees.  

9.	She moved into new accommodation and started a university course in September 2022. 

10.	SLC carried out MW continual employment checks in December 2022. During this check SLC found that it had made an error in awarding her support under this route. SLC then asked Ms Y to provide additional evidence and advised her that although she did not qualify for support under the eligibility criteria as a MW in her own right route, she would be assessed as a child of an EEA Migrant Worker instead. 

11.	Ms Y said the SLC’s email did not mention that the funding would be on hold or could be withdrawn completely at this point and so continued with her studies.  

12.	SLC reassessed Ms Y’s eligibility and deemed her ineligible for the support from the outset of her course. This resulted in a maintenance loan overpayment of £3,202.98 and SLC paid no tuition fees to the university.  
 
13.	Ms Y went through the formal appeal process on 31 January 2023 which was unsuccessful. 

14.	Ms Y then raised a complaint with SLC, and an independent review was also carried out by the Independent Assessor (IA) as part of the complaint process. It upheld her complaint that she was wrongly advised about her eligibility and the IA recommended SLC pay her financial redress. The complaint process concluded on 5 August 2024 when Department of Education provided a letter of instruction to SLC following the IA report, setting out the financial remedy it would offer Ms Y.  
 
15.	During this time Ms Y continued with her course into the third term which she completed. She then withdrew from the course at the end of the academic year. 

Evidence . Click here to expand

16.	In order to consider the complaint, we looked at the information Ms Y provided to us and what she told us when we made contact. We also considered the information SLC provided to us, including its complaint file, call recordings and what it told us when we made contact.   

17.	We use relevant law, policy, guidance and standards to inform our thinking. This allows us to consider what should have happened. In this case we have referred to the following standards:

	•	PHSO: Principles for Remedy 2009 
	•	PHSO: Guidance on financial remedy 2009 
	•	Complaints Procedure for SLC gov.co.uk March 2021 
	•	Independent Assessors for SLC: Terms of Reference February 2020 

Findings . Click here to expand

Withdrawal of funding 

18.	Ms Y complains that SLC has not offered the appropriate remedy to her complaint and did not adequately consider her circumstances when asking her to repay some of the fees. 
 
19.	We can see from the detailed investigation carried out by SLC and further investigation carried out by the IA that Ms Y disputed the way that SLC dealt with her application for student finance for the academic year 22/23. It is not disputed that SLC originally advised Ms Y that she was eligible for funding and that this was an error. Ms Y was not entitled to any funding at all.  

20.	Whilst SLC did wrongly advise Ms Y that she was entitled to funding when it issued a notice of entitlement in August 2022 Ms Y was not eligible and did not meet the criteria for funding. Our investigation is not focused on the decision itself as this was dealt with under SLC’s appeal process. As per the terms of the SLC’s appeal process Ms Y’s only recourse to challenge the decision regarding her eligibility following the formal appeal would be through the courts.  

21.	We have not reinvestigated the aspects of the complaint where SLC has already acknowledged things went wrong. It is not in doubt that SLC wrongly told Ms Y that she was entitled to funding. We acknowledge that SLC, and the IA recognise that this was an error which should not have happened. Our investigation is to consider the impact of this maladministration and whether SLC has done enough to put this right.  
 
22.	SLC, in its complaint response dated 27 February 2023 acknowledged that it provided Ms Y with incorrect advice regarding the evidence requirements for of her application and that SLC awarded her financial support in error.  

23.	It acknowledged that there had been service failings and said that as Ms Y had made a formal appeal in relation to her entitlement it would only consider an ex-gratia payment to address the impact of its mistake once she had received the outcome from the appeals team. 

24.	The IA’s report, dated September 2023, found that Ms Y was not disputing her eligibility but that her complaint centred around the fact that she was told she could have funding and relied upon that notification when making decisions about her future and her finances.  

25.	It said that whilst it was regrettable that SLC did in fact provide incorrect advice it remained the fact that Ms Y was not eligible for student finance under any of the routes she applied for.  As Ms Y received a payment of maintenance loan this payment was now deemed to be an overpayment and pursuant to the relevant regulations, SLC are obliged to seek recovery of it.  

26.	The IA acknowledged that Ms Y had incurred expenses as a direct result of acting on an award which she may have not otherwise incurred and that it was reasonable for SLC to reimburse these. It invited Ms Y to provide any evidence of her direct losses.  

27.	The IA also recommended that SLC should offer Ms Y an ex-gratia payment of £450 to reflect the poor service she received. It also recommended it reimburse £50 for her postage costs. 

28.	The IA later provided an addendum to the report in relation to the direct losses Ms Y incurred following receipt of her evidence. The IA concluded that Ms Y sustained the following losses and recommended SLC reimburse her for the following with interest at the rate of 5% ; 

University tuition fee £9,250.00 (reflective of 1 year’s tuition) 
Loss of earnings £6,242.67  
Transportation costs £111.60 
Total £15,604.27 
 
29.	The IA stated that the 5% should not be applied to the tuition fee portion of her claim as she had not been charged any interest from the university. The 5% was only to be applied to the loss of earnings and transportation cost which totalled to £6354.27 and suggested that the interest should start to run from the mid-point between September and June, thus 15 January 2023, and should run until the date of payment.  
 
30.	In regard to the tuition fee, the IA said that although the liability to pay the outstanding fees to the university, it would recommend a direct payment from SLC to her university to clear the debt. Otherwise, payment should be made to Ms Y. 
 
31.	Miss Y also claimed for the cost of her accommodation whilst she was at university and moving costs. In weighing the evidence the IA noted that Ms Y would have likely had to move out of her mother’s home where she was living prior to starting her course, because her mother moved to a smaller house in November 2022. The IA therefore made no recommendation in terms of Ms Y’s housing costs.  

32.	The Department for Education (DfE), the government department which oversees the work of the SLC, wrote to Ms Y on 5 August 2024. Having considered the recommendations made by the IA, DfE concluded that Ms Y should be reimbursed her tuition fee for only the first term of her course.  

33.	It did not consider that she should be reimbursed for other losses, including loss of earnings, for the rest of the academic year. It said this was because she was found ineligible for student finance by SLC on 5 December 2022 and therefore aware that no funding would be available after that date. It said despite this, Ms Y continued with her course for the following terms and she could have taken steps to mitigate her losses at this point.  
 
34.	DfE said SLC should not repay direct losses for transport as these expenses were covered by the maintenance loan.    

35.	DfE instructed SLC to reimburse the following amounts:  
 
University tuition fee £2312.50 (covering the period September-December) 
Ex-gratia payment £450 
Postage costs £50 
Total £2812.50 
 
36.	It also agreed that in addition to the above that the maintenance loan overpayment should be reduced by £2080.66 to reflect the loss of earnings. These are earnings DfE say that Ms Y may have been expected to receive between September-December, had she been working full time instead of part time.  
 
37.	The remainder of the maintenance loan of £1,122.32 would then need be repaid by Ms Y through its income contingent repayment scheme. This means that Ms Y would only repay the loan through her wages when she was earning enough to meet the income threshold required for making loan repayments.  
 
38.	The DFE said there was no basis for paying interest on the amount to be reimbursed to Ms Y.  
 
39.	The Independent Assessors for SLC Terms of Reference, under section 1 ‘Independent Assessor Student Finance Appeals and Complaints’ says it is the IA’s role to provide the customer with an impartial view of their case and make recommendations for redress where this is appropriate. It says the final decision on redress rests with the Secretary of State for Education. Under this Terms of Reference, the SLC will abide by the IA’s recommendations unless directed to do otherwise by DfE.  

40.	We have therefore focused our consideration on the impact to Ms Y following SLC’s mistake and whether the remedy offered to Ms Y, based on the DFE’s instructions to SLC, is adequate in line with our own Principles for Remedy. These state that when things go wrong organisations should offer an appropriate and proportionate remedy. They should: 

	•	ideally, return complainants and, where appropriate, others who have suffered injustice or hardship as a result of the same maladministration or poor service, to the position they were in before the maladministration or poor service took place 
	•	if that is not possible, compensate them appropriately. 

41.	Ms Y disputes DfE’s consideration of her claim for financial redress and feels she should be reimbursed the full year’s tuition fee and other losses. She does not agree with its consideration of her decision to continue and complete the first year of her course once she became aware that she had been awarded funding incorrectly.  

42.	In order to consider whether it is reasonable to attribute any ongoing impact to Ms Y beyond December 2022, we have looked at the communication between Ms Y and SLC regarding her application and the decision that she was not eligible.  We looked at written communication in the form of emails from SLC to Ms Y.  

43.	Ms Y first received an email from SLC on 5 December 2022 which requested evidence for her student finance application. SLC said as Ms Y was a ‘rest of the world’ national, she was not eligible for migrant worker support in her own right. However, as she was a family member of an EU national, she may be eligible for support as a child of a migrant worker.  

44.	The email said that her application had been ‘zero assessed’ awaiting the evidence it outlined in the email. It then advised Ms Y that SLC would review her evidence and if it had everything it required it would confirm her funding. It said if it needed anything further, it would be in touch with her. 
 
45.	On 12 January 2023 SLC emailed Ms Y again stating ‘further action required- how to keep your funding as a migrant worker’. It gave Ms Y as list of documents to send in. The email said there was a temporary pause to her funding while SLC was waiting for that evidence. It said that it had temporarily paused her maintenance loan funding, and it would be reinstated as soon as possible once she sent everything in. 

46.	The email went on to say, if she was unable to send the evidence required, the pause to the maintenance loan will become permanent which means she will only be able to get tuition fee support, and she would have to repay any maintenance loan already received.  

47.	SLC emailed Ms Y on 31 January 2023 telling her she was ineligible for student finance in the academic year 2022/23. It said the evidence she provided did not confirm that she had maintained dependency on her mother while living in the UK and so was not eligible as a child of a migrant worker. It sent her a formal notice of entitlement dated 1 February 2023 to confirm she was not eligible for any financial help. 
 
48.	We spoke to Ms Y to understand her decision making at this time. Ms Y tells us she continued into her second term because as far as she was concerned, although she was not eligible under the original route she applied for, she assumed that as the emails asked for further evidence she would qualify under the route SLC was assessing her for i.e. as a child of a migrant worker.  
 
49.	Ms Y tells us that although she was aware in the second term that she was ineligible for funding, she continued into her third term as she had made an appeal against the original decision with the hope of it being overturned and working out in her favour.  

50.	She received an email from the appeals team dated 3 April 2023 which thanked her for contacting the appeals department and confirmed that the appeal had been adopted and was under the review stage 1 of the formal appeal process.  

51.	The email said in order to ensure all relevant information could be taken into account Ms Y should confirm whether she had applied for indefinite leave to remain under the EU Settlement Scheme. It asked her to provide documentation confirming the date of the application and whether she had received an outcome. It said the appeal would be on hold until it received this information from her.  

52.	Ms Y responded to the email on 19 April 2023 advising that she had not yet applied for indefinite leave to remain as she was not eligible to do so until May 2024. She advised that she currently held pre-settled status as a family member of an EU citizen living in the UK. 

53.	Ms Y told us she is aware that there was no guarantee mentioned in the email, but she felt the appeal team was actively looking into options and trying to get the decision overturned. As it was the first time she was going through this experience, she believed it would work out in her favour.  

54.	We have no reason to doubt what Ms Y tells us; she began her course in the incorrect, but reasonable, belief that she qualified for funding. Based on what we have seen in SLC’s communications with her around the time her eligibility for funding came into doubt, SLC was not entirely clear that her funding would be withdrawn. In our view the wording was ambiguous and gave the impression that her funding was on hold or paused, pending further information from her. As SLC did not confirm that she was eligible for no funding at all until she received the notice of entitlement on 1 February, we can see why she did not withdraw from her course in December as she was unclear about what her entitlement was at that point. From her perspective, based on what SLC told her, it was still possible that she would have been entitled to some funding as a child of a migrant worker until this was later confirmed.   

55.	Whilst we agree that it was reasonable for Ms Y to continue into the second term, we cannot say that this is the case once she received a formal notification from SLC that she was not entitled to the funding. There is no ambiguity in the emails from the appeals team that would suggest that the decision would be overturned or that it was trying to find a way to do so. At this point we consider that it was Ms Y’s own personal decision to continue into the third term. While we can understand that she was hopeful at this point that the decision would be reversed, continuing on the basis that she hoped it would work out in her favour was a decision she took in the knowledge that her appeal could be unsuccessful. We do not doubt this was a difficult decision for her to make and in reaching this view we are not judging her choices, only whether it is reasonable to attribute any financial impact arising from them to SLC’s mistake.   

56.	Ms Y provided us with the university’s withdrawal form which is applicable to all students. We can see from the form that it clearly states that if the withdrawal date is during term 2 of the academic year, then 50% of the full year tuition fee is due to be paid. If the withdrawal is during term 3 then 100% of the full year tuition fee is due.  

57.	Ms Y did not formally find out she was not eligible until 1 February 2023 which was during term 2. She would have been liable for the 50% of the tuition fees whether she withdrew at the start or at the end of the term.  

58.	We cannot say that SLC should consider making payment to cover Ms Y’s maintenance loan overpayment as its decision to recover this payment is correct and in line with the regulations that SLC must follow. Neither we nor SLC have the powers to set aside regulations. We note that SLC is not seeking immediate repayment of the overpaid amount and Ms Y can repay this under the income contingent arrangements in place for student finance repayments.  

59.	Ms Y also said that she incurred unnecessary travel fees and that this was a direct losses for travel to attend university however while we would consider these to have been covered by the maintenance loan at the time Ms Y was then asked to pay this loan back. Ms Y would have not attended University and incurred these costs had she been aware from the outset she was not eligible for funding 

60.	We can see that the IA has considered Ms Y’s request for reimbursement of rental costs and found that on the balance of probabilities Ms Y would have likely had to move out of the family home as her mother downsized, and this would have been from the end of November 2022. We find the IA’s position on this point reasonable and agree that SLC should not be required to reimburse rent on the basis that Ms Y would have eventually had to move out and pay rent even if she did not attend university. 
 
61.	Ms Y also claims loss of earnings as, had she have been able to make an informed decision not to start the course, she would have been in full time, rather than part time employment for the academic year.  

62.	We agree that there was a loss of opportunity for Ms Y to continue her full time employment when she was given incorrect notification that she was eligible for student finance. SLC accepts that, but for its mistake, Ms Y would have continued in her full-time employment. Ms Y has provided significant evidence of her income before and after she started the course and it is clear that, had she continued in her full time role, she would have earnt more. As we have set out above, we do not think Ms Y could have reasonably taken steps to mitigate this loss before receiving confirmation that she was not eligible for funding under any route.  
 
63.	Having considered what SLC has already done to put things right, we found that the remedy it has offered to Ms Y does not go far enough in putting her back in the position she would have been in, but for its mistake. This is because the evidence we have seen so far shows that Ms Y started the second term as at this point the status of her funding was somewhat ambiguous and she did not receive official notice that she was not entitled to any funding until after the start date of the term. We found that she could not have reasonably taken steps to mitigate incurring any further unnecessary fees or other expenses or losses until she received this confirmation.  
 
64.	Ms Y also said she suffered from stress which affected her mental health which arose from her dealings with SLC once she found out she was no longer eligible for funding and went through the complaint process. We agree that finding out she was no longer eligible for funding, having already been granted this and making decisions about her life based on that advice, would have been very upsetting and resolving the situation was clearly stressful. This would have been avoided, but for SLC’s mistake. We can see that SLC has already agreed to pay Miss Y £450 to reflect ‘poor service’. We note that the maximum ex-gratia payment the IA can recommend, in line with its terms of reference, is £500.  

65.	Ms Y told us how she felt when she found out her funding had been withdrawn. She said it had been a hard decision to leave her home, family and friends to attend university in a different city and that it was devastating to learn that this had been ‘for nothing’. She also told us this took a toll on her mental health. She told us she became very depressed and felt embarrassed at having to ask friends and family to loan her money to help support herself while she continued with her course. 

66.	We are left in no doubt that this was a very upsetting time for Ms Y. She was left in a position where she had to make difficult decisions about her finances and her future which she would not have had to make, but for SLC’s mistakes. 

67.	In considering whether SLC has done enough to address the emotional impact to Ms Y, we considered our Principles for Remedy, our own guidance on financial remedy and scale of injustice. £450 sits within level 2 of our scale of injustice. This relates to cases where what has gone wrong has had a relatively low impact on the person affected. This will often result in a degree of distress, inconvenience or minor pain. This could also include instances where an injustice was more serious but only took place once, or was of short duration. 

68.	It is our view that the emotional impact Ms Y told us about goes beyond the relatively low impact described within a level 2 injustice, as there was a period of uncertainty for around two months in regards to her eligibility for funding and considering that the final decision about funding had significant impact on her emotional wellbeing during this time. 

69.	We consider that the impact Ms Y suffered is in line with level 3 of our scale of injustice which says level 3 cases would have a moderate impact on the person affected (for example, in terms of distress, worry or inconvenience.) A case may also be level three if the impact on the person affected was significant but was only sustained for a short period of time and in line with this we recommend SLC increase its ex-gratia payment to £1000 to remedy the distress Ms Y suffered.
 
70.	 We have gone on below to consider our findings on how SLC dealt with Ms Y’s complaint.

Complaint handling  
 
71.	Ms Y told us she was unhappy with the delays in dealing with her complaint and that this led to additional stress and frustration.  
  
72.	Ms Y first contacted SLC complaints team on 31 January 2023 after receiving the outcome from the appeal. She called SLC on 6 February 2023 and we have listened to a recording of this call as part of our investigation. During this call Ms Y informed the call handler that she had raised a complaint. She said it had been five working days and she had not had any acknowledgment. She said she just needed someone to look at her complaint due to the urgent nature of her circumstances. 

73.	The call handler referred to her appeal that was ongoing and had been lodged, but Ms Y explained that her call was not in relation to the appeal itself but a complaint that she had raised about the issues she had with SLC.  
 
74.	Ms Y confirmed that she raised her complaint by email and provided the date that this was done, she explained she had the automated response to say that she would get an acknowledgement in 5 working days. The call handler advised her she still had one working day to go and advised her to check her account the next day to see if there was an acknowledgment or update. The call handler also advised she would then have a full review within 15 days following the acknowledgement. Ms Y was advised to call back the next day if she still had not received anything.  

75.	Ms Y then contacted SLC on 22 February 2023 to raise a complaint over the phone as she had not received a response to her email dated 31 January 2023, she was advised during this call that the complaint procedure can take up to 30 plus days and was told she could register another complaint. 
 
76.	SLC provided a response to Ms Y’s complaint on 27 February 2023 and apologised for the delay in responding to her email ad that this was due to an administrative error. It provided a detailed response to her complaint and also acknowledged that SLC had also registered her formal appeal in relation to the decision made. 
 
77.	Ms Y then responded on 27 February 2023 to say he was unhappy with the response and asked when she would have a final response in order to be able to go to the ombudsman. 
 
78.	SLC responded to Ms Y on 2 March 2023 and acknowledged her dissatisfaction with its complaint response. It explained to her that for the ombudsman to consider her complaint it would require her to have exhausted SLC’s process. It said that as she had a formal appeal still outstanding, she would need to allow time for this to be reviewed and a final decision to be made regarding her funding. 
 
79.	It said that once she had received the outcome of the appeal, if she still remained unhappy with its services, she could contact SLC and it would look to escalate her complaint to the Independent Assessor for review.  
 
80.	Ms Y then wrote to SLC on 3 June 2023 to advise SLC that the outcome of her appeal had been decided and that nothing different had been said or decided, she was still found to be ineligible for funding. She then requested for her complaint to be escalated to the Independent Assessor.  

81.	SLC responded on 9 June 2023 acknowledging her request to refer to the Independent Assessor and advised that the current wait time for referral is up to three months.  

82.	The Independent Assessor report was completed on 21 September 2023 and a further addendum provided on 12 February 2024. 
 
83.	The complaint procedure that was in place on the gov.uk website at the time of Ms Y raising her complaint says that SLC aim to fully investigate and resolve all complaints in its first response.  

84.	It says that it will acknowledge complaints within 5 working days of receiving it. It then will get allocated to a Customer Relations Officer to investigate and that the comprehensive response can be expected within 15 working days from receipt of the complaint.  
 
85.	The guidance says that SLC aims to complete all complaints within these timescales and that sometimes complaints can be complex and SLC may need to extend the time beyond 15 working days and if this is the case SLC would notify the complainant.  
 
86.	If a complainant remains unsatisfied with the response there is an escalation process available where the complaint is then escalated to the Independent Assessor’s office. The Independent Assessors are appointed by Ministers and not employed by SLC. The guidance explains that the Independent Assessors conduct an impartial review but have no legal powers to overturn correctly made decisions. 
 
87.	We can see from the complaint file and evidence provided that Ms Y did not receive an acknowledgment to her complaint within the 5 working days. 
 
88.	The final response was provided within 19 working days following her initial complaint on the 31 January 2023, this is 4 days outside of the 15 days stated in the guidance. 

89.	We can then see that there was a delay in referring to the IA office due to the ongoing appeal and that once this was escalated to the IA office a response was provided within the three months as advised in SLC’s email to Ms Y. 

90.	Whilst we accept that the delays overall would have caused Ms Y additional stress, the delays between SLC’s final response and referring to the IA to complete the complaints process were unavoidable. This is because SLC was correct in advising that whilst an appeal was ongoing the IA could not consider the complaint, this is because it would not have been appropriate for the IA to complete a review while the outcome of the appeal was still unknown.  
 
91.	We can see that this is outlined in the Independent Assessors for SLC Terms of Reference under Section 5. Exclusion from Investigation which says the Independent Assessor shall not investigate where the SLC internal procedures have not been exhausted. This then also goes on to say that the internal procedure shall not be treated as having been exhausted until the appeal and or/complaint has been made to SLC’s office and SLC has communicated the final decision on the appeal/complaint to the complainant.  
 
92.	We reviewed the delay in Ms Y's complaint. In our view the four-day wait for her final response was a minor, isolated issue. As the appeal was ongoing, the complaint could not have been referred to the Independent Assessor any sooner, since SLC could only make the referral once the appeal had been concluded in accordance with the IA’s terms of reference, therefore we cannot see that SLC did anything wrong in the way it handled Ms Y’s complaint. 
 
93.	We do understand that Ms Y would have suffered from stress while dealing with SLC during the complaint process and the length of time taken. As we have not found any failings in how SLC dealt with Miss Y’s complaint, we do not expect it to take further action to address this. 

Recommendations . Click here to expand

13.We make recommendations in line with our Principles for Remedy which say public bodies should acknowledge failures, apologise, make amends, and use the opportunity to improve their services. The Principles say we aim to ensure the public body puts the complainant back in the position they would have been in had nothing gone wrong. If that is not possible, the public body should compensate them appropriately.  

14.Our Principles for Remedy are reflected in the UK Central Government Complaint Standards which say organisations should offer fair remedies to put things right and identify learning and use it to improve services.  

What the organisation should do

16.Our Principles for Remedy say organisations should acknowledge poor service and take steps to put things right when this leads to an injustice or hardship.  

17.Our Principles for Remedy say organisations should compensate people appropriately if they cannot return the person affected to the position they would have been in if the poor service had not occurred.

18.To decide on a level of financial remedy, we review similar cases where the person has experienced a similar injustice, along with our severity of injustice scale. 
Following this review, we recommend SLC:

	•	should reimburse Ms Y for university fees for term one and two. It should also reimburse Miss Y for loss of earnings from the date she started her first term until she received the official notice of entitlement on 31 January 2023. It should calculate this based on the evidence of earnings Ms Y has already provided as part of the complaints process.  
	•	pay Ms Y £1000 in recognition of emotional impact to Ms Y as a result of finding out she had incorrectly been awarded funding and was no longer eligible.
	•	SLC should offset the recommended reimbursements for financial loss against the outstanding maintenance loan balance as it has already reduced this to reflect the amount Ms Y owes. 
	•	SLC should give Ms Y the choice of whether the £1,000 ex-gratia payment is paid to her directly, or offset against the amount she currently owes, to reflect that this payment is intended to remedy the distress caused rather than recover what she owes. 

	•	send us evidence it has done this by 18 06 26.



Stay updated
Subscribe to our mailing list for regular updates about our work.
Enter email address
Contact us
 Helpline 0345 015 4033
Monday to Thursday 9am to 4pm | Friday 8.30am to 12pmAbout us
Make a complaint
Latest jobs
News
Freedom of information requests
Accessibility|Contact us|Cookies|Privacy|Sitemap
Our Decisions

Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman. Click this to return to our homepageAccessibilityLanguage
HomeDecisionsParliamentary decisionsReport
UK Visas and Immigration (UKVI)
Report | Decision date: 23 January 2025
Summary
Mr G complains UKVI incorrectly applied a ‘no recourse to public funds’ condition when it granted him leave to remain in the UK. Mr G said UKVI’s error meant he was ineligible to claim tax credits between April 2014 and August 2017.

Category	Outcome
Entitlement, loss of	Upheld
Our decision . Click here to expand
1.	We found UKVI failed to ‘get it right’ when it applied a ‘no recourse to public funds’ condition to Mr G’s leave to remain when they had no legal basis to do so at that time. This meant Mr G had no certainty over his financial position for a prolonged period. We recognise this caused Mr G and his family significant worry and distress.

2.	We recommend UKVI:

	•	apologise to Mr G
	•	pay compensation of £1,500 for the worry, distress and uncertainty their failings caused him
	•	compensate Mr G for the tax credits he would have been entitled to between April 2014 and November 2015
	•	review Mr G’s entitlement to recourse to public funds from August 2015, in line with the Tribunal’s decision in a similar case

3.	UKVI have also agreed to take wider action, to help those who may have been similarly affected. UKVI will:

	•	Re-insert the information on reconsiderations, following a relevant Tribunal decision, into their guidance
	•	Put information about applying for a reconsideration on gov.uk to make it more visible for those potentially affected
	•	Produce an operation instruction for their staff to ensure they know how to identify relevant cases if they receive a reconsideration request or complaint
	•	Contact HMRC and DWP so that they can signpost affected people to UKVI if they become aware of any cases

The complaint . Click here to expand
4.	Mr G complained on 30 April 2014 UK Visas and Immigration (UKVI) incorrectly applied a ‘no recourse to public funds’ condition when it granted him leave to remain in the UK.

5.	Mr G said UKVI’s error meant he was ineligible to claim tax credits between April 2014 and August 2017. He saud this caused him worry about his financial position.

6.	Mr G would like UKVI to compensate him for the tax credits he had to repay to HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC) for the period between April 2014 to April 2016, and for the tax credits he was unable to claim between April 2016 and August 2017. Mr G is also seeking compensation for the worry caused.

Background . Click here to expand
7.	Mr G arrived in the UK in 2000. On 30 April 2014 UKVI granted Mr G leave to remain under Article 8 of the Convention on Human Rights (right to respect for one’s private and family life). It said the conditions attached to his stay allowed him to work, but he had no recourse to public funds (that is, he was unable to claim most benefits).

8.	Mr G subsequently applied for, and received, tax credits. Mr G applied because he did not believe tax credits to be a benefit, as it was administered by HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC) rather than the Department for Work and Pensions. Each April between 2014 and 2016 Mr G applied to renew his claim for tax credits. In May and July 2016 HMRC looked again at Mr G’s claim and decided he was not entitled to tax credits due to the ‘no recourse to public funds’ condition attached to his leave to remain. HMRC stopped paying tax credits to Mr G and asked him to repay the approximately £8,500 he had already received.

Evidence . Click here to expand
9.	We have considered the information Mr G, and his representative, provided with his complaint and in our subsequent discussions with them. We have also considered information provided by UKVI, which includes the relevant files and their responses to Mr G.

10.	We use relevant law, policy, guidance and standards to inform our thinking. This allows us to consider what should have happened. We have referred to the following standards:

	•	The Immigration Rules as of April 2014
	•	The Immigration Directorate Instructions as of October 2013
	•	The Upper Tribunal decision in R v Secretary of State for the Home Department 2014
	•	Our Principles of Good Administration 2009 and our UK Central Government Complaint Standards 2022

Findings . Click here to expand
Incorrect application of ‘no recourse to public funds’ condition

11.	The Immigration Rules (the Rules) are made up of pieces of legislation that constitute the UK’s immigration law. Before they can be implemented, the Rules are laid before Parliament, often in the form of secondary legislation. They automatically come into force unless either House of Parliament stops them within a fixed period. 

12.	Our Principles of Good Administration ‘getting it right’ says organisations should comply with the law and have regard for the rights of those concerned. They should act according to their statutory powers and duties and any other rules governing the service they provide. They should follow their own policy and procedural guidance.

13.	On 9 July 2012 UKVI implemented a number of changes to the Rules which were, in part, aimed at safeguarding the UK economy. Those changes were not put before Parliament at that point.  Even though the changes had not, and should have been, put before Parliament, UKVI proceeded to amend its policy, the Immigration Directorate Instructions (a policy document which provides UKVI staff with guidance when making decisions). As at October 2013 the Instructions said a ‘no recourse to public funds’ condition should be added to grants of limited leave to remain, except in exceptional circumstances.

14.	In April 2014, at the time UKVI granted Mr G leave to remain, section 276BE of the Rules, which amounted to the relevant law at the time, made no provision for a ‘no recourse to public funds’ condition to be imposed. 

15.	On 10 July 2014 UKVI presented to Parliament the Statement of Changes in the Rules (HC532) which would allow UKVI to attach a ‘no recourse to public funds condition’ to limited leave to remain. The changes came into effect on 28 July 2014. 

16.	This meant that when UKVI granted Mr G leave to remain in the UK in April 2014 it attached a ‘no recourse to public funds’ condition in accordance with the Immigration Directorate Instructions. However, it did not become part of the Rules until July 2014 when it was put before Parliament. In April 2014 when UKVI granted Mr G leave to remain there was no lawful provision in the Rules for UKVI to impose such a condition.

17.	We know this because of another case progressing through the courts at the same time. In November 2014 another person (Mrs R), who had a ‘no recourse to public funds’ condition attached to their leave in October 2013, asked the Upper Immigration Tribunal to quash that decision. Of relevance to our investigation into Mr G’s complaint are the first two grounds Mrs R asked the Tribunal to consider. They concerned the lawfulness of UKVI’s ‘no recourse to public funds’ policy.

18.	The Tribunal said previous case law had established everything that could reasonably be classified as a rule must be laid before Parliament before being applied as part of the Rules. They found UKVI’s ‘no recourse to public funds’ guidance was sufficiently inflexible that it was, to all intents and purposes, a rule. The Tribunal said, as such, UKVI should have laid it before Parliament as part of the Immigration Rules before applying it to any applicant’s leave to remain. Because UKVI had not done so until July 2014, the Tribunal found UKVI’s ‘no recourse to public funds’ policy, as it existed at the time of its decisions on both Mrs R and Mr G’s application, to be unlawful. It quashed UKVI’s decision on Mrs R’s case on that basis and said UKVI should make a fresh decision on whether to impose the NRPF condition based on her individual circumstances.

19.	We find by imposing a ‘no recourse to public funds’ condition on Mr G’s leave in April 2014 UKVI did not ‘get it right’. UKVI should not have taken this blanket approach to applying the NRPF condition in all cases where limited leave was granted until the changes had been approved by Parliament in July 2014. The Rules at the time UKVI made its decision on Mr G’s leave in April 2014 did not permit it to impose the ‘no recourse to public funds’ condition. Therefore, we find UKVI should not have attached that condition to Mr G’s leave and it acted maladministratively. That means Mr G would have been entitled to claim tax credits from April 2014.

20.	We now go on to consider the impact of UKVI’s failings. Mr G says the loss of his tax credit entitlement and the requirement he repay a sum of £8,500 was a shock and caused him worry about his financial position. We recognise Mr G believes the appropriate remedy here would be for UKVI to compensate him for the tax credits he would have received between 2014 and 2017, as if the NRPF condition had never been applied. However, to reach a view on the impact of UKVI’s failing, we have considered what should have happened after UKVI attached the condition to Mr G’s leave.

21.	While the Rules were changed in July 2014, after being put before Parliament, those changes did not apply retrospectively and so they would have had no impact on the decision UKVI made in Mr G’s case in April 2014.

22.	We consider the Tribunal’s decision on Mrs R’s case in November 2014 was an intervening factor and should have prompted UKVI to look again at those similar cases where, prior to July 2014, they had applied the condition when they had no legal basis to do so. UKVI told us it amended its guidance in August 2015, having had time to consider the Tribunal’s decision.  It said:

‘In light of the Upper Tribunal judgment in [Mrs R] in November 2014, where, prior to 28 July 2014, an applicant has … been granted leave to remain … subject to a condition of no recourse to public funds, the applicant may seek a reconsideration of the condition code attached to their leave by making an application under the published process for requesting a change of condition code.’

23.	UKVI did not contact the people affected to make them aware of the option to request a reassessment. This was a missed opportunity to resolve matters at an early stage. Mr G first contacted UKVI in 2016 about the impact of the NRPF condition when HMRC told him he had to repay his tax credits.  UKVI said they should have treated that as an application for a reconsideration of Mr G’s NRPF condition but they did not do so. This was a further missed opportunity on the part of UKVI. This was a very difficult period for Mr G and if UKVI had taken appropriate action sooner, it would have reduced both the financial impact on Mr G, and the worry and upset it caused him.

24.	Our Complaint Standards Framework says, where mistakes have been made, organisations should identify suitable ways to put things right. While we are not bound by the Tribunal’s decision, we consider their approach here is reasonable. They directed UKVI about how to put things right – they told UKVI to consider Mrs R’s circumstances and determine whether she should have been entitled to recourse to public funds. We consider that is what UKVI should have done in Mr G’s case in August 2015, or shortly after, when they published their amended guidance. 

25.	We recognise it may have taken UKVI some time to identify those potentially affected by the Tribunal’s decision, contact them and assess their eligibility. However, given the vulnerabilities of this group of people and the significant impact on people’s financial means, we consider this work should have been carried out promptly. We consider a period of three months would have been reasonable. On that basis, we find Mr G would have been entitled to the tax credits he received between April 2014 and November 2015, as November 2015 is likely to be the earliest point at which UKVI could have reconsidered Mr G’s leave to determine whether there was any awful basis to impose the condition. 

26.	UKVI have agreed to now reconsider Mr G’s circumstances, as they should have done in August 2015. They say they will consider his circumstances in line with the policy currently in place, which is more lenient and generous than the policy in place in 2015. UKVI recognise, due to the passage of time, Mr G may have difficulty in providing all the evidence they need, and have committed to being as flexible as possible about that. They have said they will provide Mr G with support to understand what evidence he may be able to provide. UKVI have said if they find the NRPF condition should not have been in place they will compensate Mr G for the tax credits he lost from August 2015 onwards. We consider this approach to be in line with the Tribunals’ decision in Mrs R’s case.

27.	UKVI missed opportunities in 2015 and 2016 to provide Mr G with clarity about his recourse to public funds and that position has still not been resolved. This means Mr G has lived with the worry and uncertainty for eight years, which is significantly longer than he should have. Mr G told us he was worried about how he would support his family and that he has spent a lot of time trying to resolve this issue. We are sorry to hear the considerable worry this caused Mr G and his family over such a prolonged period. We cannot say Mr G would not have had to repay any tax credits up to 2017, if UKVI had acted promptly to reassess his entitlement following the Tribunal’s decision. However, any overpayment would have been smaller and had less of an impact on him. We find these were significant injustices to Mr G.

Recommendations . Click here to expand
28.	In considering our recommendations, we have referred to our ‘Principles for Remedy’. These state that where poor service or maladministration has led to injustice or hardship, the organisation responsible should take steps to put things right. 

29.	Our principles say public organisations should put things right and, if possible, return the person affected to the position they would have been in if the poor service had not occurred. If that is not possible, they should compensate them appropriately. 

30.	To decide on a level of financial remedy, we review similar cases where the person has experienced similar injustice, along with our severity of injustice scale. Following this review, we recommend UKVI should, within one month from our final report:

	•	Compensate Mr G for the tax credits he repaid for the period from April 2014 to November 2015 and pay reasonable interest for the loss of use of that money
	•	Make a consolatory payment of £1500 in recognition of the worry, uncertainty and financial concern Mr G experienced due to the incorrect imposition of the condition on his leave and the delay in reviewing his entitlement, in line with the Tribunal’s decision in Mrs R’s case. We consider this impact falls at within level four severity of injustice scale, which recognises worry, distress and uncertainty over a prolonged period
	•	Write to Mr G to apologise for the impact of the failings we have identified

31.	Within three months of our final report, UKVI should also:

	•	Reconsider whether Mr G should have had recourse to public funds from November 2015, as set out in paragraph 26, and to consider any further impacts that may become apparent as a result of that work

32.	Our Principles of Good Complaint Handling ‘acting fairly and proportionately’ say, where failings have been identified, public organisations should identify whether any others may have suffered injustice as a result of those failings. We have not made a wider systemic recommendation as UKVI have agreed to take the following actions, and provide evidence to us, which we consider appropriate, to address any potential wider impact:

	•	Re-insert the information on reconsiderations, following the Tribunal decision in Mrs R’s case, into their guidance
	•	Put information about applying for a reconsideration on gov.uk to make it more visible for those potentially affected
	•	Produce an operation instruction for their staff to ensure they know how to identify relevant cases if they receive a reconsideration request or complaint
	•	Contact HMRC and DWP so that they can signpost affected people to UKVI if they become aware of any cases

Stay updated
Subscribe to our mailing list for regular updates about our work.
Enter email address
Contact us
 Helpline 0345 015 4033
Monday to Thursday 9am to 4pm | Friday 8.30am to 12pmAbout us
Make a complaint
Latest jobs
News
Freedom of information requests
Accessibility|Contact us|Cookies|Privacy|Sitemap
Our Decisions